To compile the program, edit the config.h file to change the
names of the files the game uses and the wizard info.  Also, uncomment the
appropriate line for the system you are compiling on. Type make
to compile the game.  You may want to edit the 'Moria_hours' file
to indicate during what hours people are allowed to play the game.

The game needs to be installed setuid for the scoreboard to work.
Use the command 'chmod 4511 moria' to do this.
The file Highscores should be mode 644 with the same owner as moria.
The files Moria_hours and Moria_news must be publicly readable with
mode 444.
(Or just type 'make install' after setting BINDIR and LIBDIR in the
Makefile to appropriate values.)

There are two choices for the key bindings, the original style and
a rogue-like style.  You can choose which one is to be the default
by changing the value of KEY_BINDINGS in config.h.

If the display does not look right, try defining BUGGY_CURSES in config.h.
Delete io.o, touch *.o, and then recompile.

For the IBM PC-RT, 3B1, 3B2, 3B20, and perhaps others, you must
define NO_SIGNED_CHARS in config.h.

Moria may not compile properly on SYS III machines(?)

Some versions of the SUN4 compiler will dump core while compiling moria2.c
with the -O flag.  Just compile without the -O flag if this happens.

If you use the Gnu C Compiler, you must also use the -fwritable-strings
options.

If your compiler has a seven character identifier limit, the Flexnames
sed file should solve the problem for you.

There is a patch file which attempts to eliminate the 32bit int assumptions
of umoria called Int16bit.patch.  This file should enable systems with
16 bit integers (such as Xenix) to compile umoria.  It has not been
extensively tested though.

There is an obsolete patch file included for Xenix.  This is a patch for an
older version of moria, 4.85, and may not work correctly on the new version.
(I haven't tried it.)  I recommend using the In16bit.patch file first, and
then referencing this file if you still have problems.
Use the -N option of patch to avoid unfixing bugs that have already been
fixed.

I have successfully compiled the game on a VAX running 4.3BSD,
SUN 3/50 running UNIX 4.2 Release 3.2, a microvax running ULTRIX 2.0,
and an NCR Tower running SYS Vr2
The program assumes that ints are 32 bits. The program passes lint
so further porting should not be too hard.
BSD/UNIX dependencies are(?) limited to the files io.c, save.c, and
signals.c.

The documentation file was split into two parts for usenet distribution.
Build a single doc file with the command "cat Moria.doc.? >Moria.doc".
