
This copy of umoria includes the first three patch files (upto u487.p3).

Please report problems to wilson@ji.Berkeley.EDU  (ucbvax!ucbji!wilson).

This is the second official release of umoria.
There have been a couple hundred bug fixes and minor enhancements.
Major notables:
  all core dumping problems should be fixed (I've said this before though...)
  character rerolling is implemented
  program is much faster: makes fewer refresh() calls
	                  was profiled and optimized
                          zillions of register declarations added
  create food does not destroy object under you
  the run '.' command stops when the screen scrolls
  can repeatedly hit ^P to display last twenty messages
  store inventories turn over more often, store inventories change after a
	save/restore of character
  several cheating tricks involving signals no longer work
        scores from panic saved games are not added to the scoreboard
	but can be played normally otherwise
Still buggy:
  stats are still truncated at 18/100, wearing/wielding an object that would
	raise a stat over 18/100 results in a permanent loss in that stat
	when object taken off
  look, throw only in 8 cardinal directions
  etc...
See the PROBLEMS file for all the gory info.

Save files from 4.85 can be read by 4.87 without problems (this compatibility
is why some bugs were not fixed, namely the stat problem above).

No work on MS-DOS portability has been done in the last six months.
This will be a top priority for the next version.
And, of course, fixing the many bugs that STILL remain.

----------------------------------------------------------

UNIX Moria 4.85

Moria is a dungeon adventure game in the manner of rogue, but
not descended from rogue.  Moria is to VMS systems, as rogue
is to UNIX.

-------------------------------------------------------------

This is my first official release.  Work is still in progress.
This project started in February '87, and play testing started in early April.
Bug reports from my playtesters have become relatively infrequent,
so the game should be relatively stable now.

Please send bug reports and/or fixes to wilson@ernie.Berkeley.EDU
Save file formats may change again.

This version of Moria is based on the original 4.8 VMS Pascal sources
written by Robert Koeneke, Jimmey Todd, Gary McAdoo and others at
the University of Oklahoma.  I have converted the program into C
for BSD Unix.  The program has since been slowly diverging from the
original game as I have 'fixed' things that didn't seem to be right.
Major changes of note are incompatible save file formats (who cares?)
and an optional rogue-like user interface for my UNIX version as opposed
to a numeric keypad interface for the VMS version.

To avoid confusion, please refer to this game as UNIX moria, or umoria
for short.

Don Kneller has ported the program to the IBM PC, and is calling it PCMORIA.

My thanks to Dave Chin and Dave desJardins of Berkeley for playtesting the
early versions and making many suggestions.  Thanks also to Craig Norborg
of Purdue for rewritting the setuid/scoreboard code in a more rational
manner.

					Jim Wilson
					wilson@ernie.Berkeley.EDU
					ucbvax!ucbernie!wilson
