AUTHOR
   Eric W. Bazin (currently bazin@carolus.cma.fr)

Welcome !
If you read this, you must have successfully uncompressed, uudecoded
and detared the MMM directory.


MMM stands for Monster Memory Mixing.
This package consists in 4 files :
  moriadecode.c,
  moriaencode.c,
  moriamerge.c,
and this README file.

License :
You may distribute and/or modify copies of this tool, provided that :
 a) you always include the 4 files composing MMM, and in particular 
    the reference to there author
 b) you clearely indicate the extent and purpose of the changes.
I would also appreciate receiving a copy of your changes, so that good
ideas can be added back into my version.


  

The corresponding programs allows to mix the monster memories from
two character (each one beeing either saved, dead or having quited)
into the memorie of one of the characters.
Of course, by repeating the process, every combination is possible.


moriadecode is a filter (read inputs on stdin and write outputs on
stdout) which transforms a savefile from umoria (typically :
moria.sav) in an equivallent decoded file (as umoria savefiles are
encoded).

moriaencode is the reverse program (also a filter).

moriamerge takes two arguments (let's call them file1 and file2) that
represents decoded savefiles from umoria (i.e. the result of
moriadecode on umoria savefiles) and produce on stdout a decoded moria
file corresponding to the character described in file1, but with the
additional memory of the character decribed in file2.

So, if character1 is saved in moria1.sav, if character2 is saved in
moria2.sav, and if we want to lear character1 what character2 knows,
we would do :

moriadecode < moria1.sav > tmp1 
 to produce a decoded file tmp1 corresponding to character1

moriadecode < moria2.sav > tmp2
 to produce a decoded file tmp2 corresponding to character2

moriamerge tmp1 tmp2 > tmp3
 to produce a decoded file tmp3 corresponding to character1
 *with the additional memory of character2*

moriaencode < tmp3 > moria1.sav 
 to produce the new umoria savefile corresponding to character1 with
 the additional memory from character2.

(Of course, if one wanted also that character2 learn what character1
knows, one would do :
moriamerge tmp2 tmp1 > tmp4
moriaencode < tmp4 > moria2.sav
).


Warnings/Bugs :
a) Theses programs have been writen and tested on Unix system, and on
HPS300 computers. I suppose they would work, on other system and
computers.
b) Theses programs don't check the version of the files submited to
them. They have been tested with umoria 5.5 files. I suppose they
would work with files from earlier version provided that theses
versions are compatibles with umoria 5.5
c) Theses programs don't check if they are "feeded" with encoded or
decoded umoria files, so take care of what you do with them.
d) The mixing of memory adds the known information of the two
characters. In particular, if you mix character with himself, he knows
the same monsters, but he will be credited from double kills (and
double deaths).
Thus, if you want to cheat, go ahead; otherwise, stay righteous !
